Actually, as it turns out, when George Bass in later years confided in me, that Texas A&M could not have come at a better time, because what had initially happened was
George Bass had gotten his PhD at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia in classics, and instead of accepting a teaching position someplace, he wanted to do research, and he needed money to do research, so he established the American Institute of Nautical Archaeology,
he found a few benefactors, and he then began trying to do archaeology under the sea, primarily in the Mediterranean, trying to attract more benefactors and so forth.
Well, in the early days, of course,
with not many benefactors they didn't have much money and so it was really a project that was run on a shoestring and there were a lot of sleepless nights worrying about where the next paycheck was going to come from.
The University of Pennsylvania had allowed them to use some space in the university, but they were not on the faculty.
They were not part of the university.
They were just using space in the university.
So, Dr. Bass was really not associated with the university when we contacted him.
He was completely independent.
Now, Van Dornick was teaching at the University of Santa Barbara in California.
And Dick Steffi was working with George independently, so he wasn't attached to any place either.
So the only person who was really attached was Fred Van Dornick.
So when they got here, were they administratively completely separate from you all?
Well, you see, this is a very interesting thing, and this, quite honestly, led to 20 years of what I call trouble.
I was not included in any of the negotiations.
What happened is after a week or so on campus, George flew back to Pennsylvania.
Dean Maxwell called me in and said, well, everything's all signed, sealed, and delivered.
He said, we'll work out the particulars later.
Well, by the time they got there later in the summer, in August, by the time they showed up, the particulars ended up like this.
They decided that the nautical program would be a graduate program, but anthropology did not have any graduate courses.
So they decided that since Ed Duran was interested in boats, that they would for a while teach graduate courses in geography.
However, they would be tied to the College of Liberal Arts, not to the College of Geoscience, much to the disgust of John Calhoun, who wanted to see them in geography.
But anthropology won out, or Maxwell won out.
So it was an interesting sort of thing in the sense that they were anthropology professors.
They were part-time, one-third time geography, two-thirds anthropology, one-third then geography.
The other thing that kind of stuck in people's craw right away
was the deal that they cut with them, which was essentially that they didn't have to teach more than one course a semester and that they would all be given 12-month appointments, which was something that the College of Liberal Arts didn't have.
Only people in Liberal Arts who had 12-month appointments were department heads and administrators.
So you can see that to the rest of the faculty in anthropology, all of a sudden bringing in three new anthropologists, George as a full professor, and Van Dornick as an associate, and Dick Steffi as a lecturer actually, because he didn't even have a bachelor's degree.
Or maybe he came as an assistant professor, I can't remember one or the other.
But anyway, but they come in with 12-month appointments.
with bigger salaries than the people in anthropology and with a very light teaching load and only graduate courses.
You only have to teach graduate courses.
You only have to teach one course a semester.
So this, you know, did create some rift early on.
In fact,
George didn't necessarily endear himself to the anthropology faculty either because in some of the early faculty meetings, I remember one in particular in which Bruce Dixon had accused George of not knowing anything about anthropology.
And George said, hell no.
I don't know anything about anthropology.
He said, in fact, I'm proud to say I have never taken an anthropology course in my life.
And so Bruce then said, well, then what in blazes are you doing as an anthropology professor?
And he said, well, I'm an anthropology professor just because that's what they say I am.
And anyway, it went on and on like this.
And basically, Bruce was trying to say that he didn't respect George.
and some of the other faculty kind of jumped on the bandwagon too, that they basically didn't accept, didn't respect George or the rest of the nautical people because they felt that they were not anthropologists.
And in fact, Fred Van Dornick's degree was in classics, and Steffi didn't have a degree, so.
In the catalog, they were listed as
Anthropology?
Yes.
They were listed as professors of anthropology.
But they had no official link to the Department of Anthropology.
Oh, yes.
Their budget, their pay came out of anthropology.
Oh, did it?
Oh, okay.
Yes.
Okay.
Yeah, they were faculty members in anthropology.
But they were not under the management authority of you, the senior officer for anthropology, were they?
Well, yes and no.
In the very beginning, yes.
In the very beginning, I was given the authority to make the decisions.
But after some of this rift developed between some of the anthropology faculty and the nautical faculty, primarily George,
George went to Maxwell and said that he wanted autonomy.
In other words, he wanted a program within anthropology much like
we'd had a program within sociology.
And so very shortly after they arrived, Maxwell granted them the Nautical Archaeology program within the Department of Anthropology.
Now, this, as I said, started a 20-year nightmare.
And the nightmare developed because as department head, I was responsible for what the people in Nautical did.
and what they said and what they published and so forth.
It was also my responsibility to determine pay raises for an article and also tenure and promotion and things like this.
But on the other hand, I had absolutely no control over what they taught, how much they taught, what they spent, or what they spent money for.
In other words, their budget had been separated from our budget.
And George, as a senior person in that unit, reported to the dean on those matters?
Yes and no.
George generally reported to anybody who he wanted to report to, most frequently, to the president.
Oh, okay.
Yeah.
He shortcut the dean.
In fact, the next dean, Keith Bryant, really got ran amok of George.
George did not like Keith Bryant, and Keith Bryant didn't like George.
And I can remember this was about 83, 84, when Keith Bryant was, he was only here for two years as dean.
But I remember one day calling me at home at about,
I don't know, 9 o'clock or something at night, just absolutely livid because he had just discovered that Vandiver had given George $100,000 out of the puff.
And Dean and Keith knew nothing about it.
He just discovered it.
I don't know how he discovered it at 9 o'clock at night.
But anyway, he was just livid and wanted to know what role I had in this.
And I told him, this is news to me.
I said, I know nothing about this.
And I said, as usual, I'm out of the loop.
But yes, George frequently went straight to the Board of Regents or went straight to the president.
Rarely did he deal with deans.
And during the, when did anthropology
become separated from the Department of Sociology?
Okay.
In 1977, well, when George came down in 77, 78, we immediately, in fact, we'd already started writing a request for a master's degree.
We got authority for a master's degree in anthropology in 1978.
While we were already a program, remember, since 1976,
So now we were programmed with a bachelor's and a master's degree.
We then immediately applied for a separate department, again, to the coordinating board, but that got hung up.
And a lot of this had to do with
a guy by the name of Reynolds.
Wasn't he on the Board of Regents?
I don't remember exactly all the details, but it was either the Board of Regents or it was the... I think it was on the Board, Joe Reynolds.
Yeah.
It was either Reynolds or it was... Part of the problem was also at the Coordinating Board, there was a problem of... I don't remember all the details, but I do remember that for a couple of years it got hung up.
And we didn't actually become a separate department until the spring of 1983, and it was effective in September of 83.
So effective September of 1983, we became a separate department.
What about the master's degree?
We already had that.
We got that in 78.
So that went easy.
Yeah, the master's degree flew right through.
So the bachelor's degree in 75 went through without a hitch.
The master's degree in 78 went through without a hitch because we had the nautical people.
And then once we got the master's degree in 78, they came over
All of them but Van Dornick came over 100% anthropology.
Van Dornick remained one-third geography until he retired, but George Bass became 100% anthropology, Steffi became 100% anthropology, but the courses were still cross-listed between geography and anthropology.
Do you remember how productive you all were in the early years of baccalaureate degree majors?
In the early years from 1976, well, we only had a few, like maybe 10 or 12.
Were you saying graduates?
These were undergraduates.
I mean, getting a degree?
Yeah.
Or was it just majors?
Majors.
I mean, people actually getting degrees.
10 or 12.
people getting a baccalaureate degree per year?
No.
These are people who, I'm talking about majors.
Oh, majors.
Yes.
I think we started out with about 10 or 12 majors.
Before the master's degree, I think it peaked around 59 majors.
And the number of people graduating every year was, I don't know, anywhere from 4 to 15 graduating.
When we got the master's in 1978,
Another little vignette here, which I thought was interesting.
In 1978, in the fall of 78, we offered our first graduate courses in anthropology.
The nautical people now were teaching courses in anthropology, and we were looking over people who had applied for the new nautical program.
Well, of course, we hadn't had much advertising.
We only had six people who applied.
And I remember five of them had fairly decent GREs and GPAs.
One of them, a lady by the name of Lisa Shuey, had a GPA that was good, but had GRE that was under 900.
And I remember George was looking through this list and was saying, well, we can admit these other five, but we couldn't possibly admit her.
And I said, George, listen, you know, what if one of these don't come?
I said, you've got to have five people and have a graduate course.
I said, for God's sakes, admit everybody who's applied.
So, very reluctantly, he admitted her too.
And the reason I say this is because she went on to get her master's in anthropology in nautical archaeology, went to Stanford and got a PhD, and is now a full professor at Brown University.
So I love to tell this story because GREs are not everything, you know.
But anyway, so they began teaching graduate courses in anthropology and everything was going along fine.
We became a separate department in 1983.
I was appointed the first department head, finally, as a head.
but still no pay increase.
I lagged behind for quite a while.
It wasn't until really late in Fallon's administration that he finally boosted me up into a pay range that was somewhat similar to some of the other departments.
And one of the things that, of course, as an administrator, you know this as well as I do, but one of the things that I'd always argued for as a department head was try to get higher salaries for the faculty.
And anthropology notoriously pays low salaries.
And the argument was always made by a number of deans.
I think they all have the same story.
Basically, well, we pay the market price.
And it just cost us more to get economy.
But anyway.
As you're pioneering with this section and then department, what were your private goals?
What were you hoping?
Two things I was really hoping for.
One, of course, was to get a doctoral program in anthropology, and secondly, to really establish what they had tried to do at Washington State University, and that was to develop a department around a focus of environmental archaeology, where a student could come and in one department could take courses in things like geomorphology,
what we call geoarchaeology, which is a study of how sites are formed, could take courses in palynology and pollen or paleoethnobotany and plants, take courses in bioarchaeology, which is a study of skeletal remains and osteology, also take studies or come and take courses in zooarchaeology and study about faunal remains.
have a department where somebody could do all of these different things in one place.
And there are really very few places in the United States that offer this kind of thing.
Washington State never really succeeded at their task.
They more or less did it, but they never did really fully succeed at it.
A few other places had tried.
Some universities had
people spread out in different departments where you could take courses in geology and courses in zoology and so forth.
But very few places had it all in one place.
So that was really the two goals, one to get a PhD and the other to develop a solid program in environmental archaeology.
Did you have another program somewhere else that you kind of were
thinking of as your model?
Well, the model that I had seen at Washington State was the one I was trying.
In other words, the perspectives that they had written.
Yeah, that was a model that wasn't yet reality.
That wasn't reality, but it was the reality.
I tried to make the reality what they tried to make the reality, and I think we succeeded and they didn't.
Is there any other program, was there then, that was already a reality that you were... Not really, no.
Not where you could do it all in one place.
During those, in the 70s and 80s, who were the other schools in this region that were competitive?
UTS, who else?
It all depended.
When people would call us up or write or ask about coming to A&M for anthropology, we would always be the first to tell them, if you really want to do cultural anthropology, it's the University of Texas that really has, I mean, they have 35 cultural anthropologists over there.
They have 55 faculty members.
I mean, it's a big department, and their big emphasis is in culture.
If you wanted to do physical anthropology or medical anthropology, the University of Houston was very strong in this area.
Rice University was strong in very key areas.
They were, when Norbeck was there, Ed Norbeck was there, they were very good in cultural.
At times they also were good in Caribbean anthropology.
And so it was, Rice never had a large faculty in anthropology and they were very good in certain key areas, mainly cultural, not archeology.
So I would tell these students that if they were interested in archeology,
that I thought they could get a better training here at A&M than they're going to get at any other school nearby, not only in Texas, but even in other states as well.
And so, quite honestly, from the very beginning, our real emphasis, even at the master's level, was training archaeologists, not very many cultural anthropologists.
Of course, there were people coming here for nautical archaeology as well.
So once we got nautical really rolling,
I need to back up, though, and tell you a little bit more about the Cultural Resource Laboratory.
Remember, we had Irv Garrison came down in 1978, or 1977 or 78 from Missouri, and Irv was a real nice guy.
He was a very good archaeologist, but I hate to say it, he was a poor administrator.
His problem was that he was too good, too nice.
And what happened was that as this program of getting all these grants and contracts expanded and got bigger and bigger, a lot of times what would happen is there'd be gaps in the funding between the time one contract ended and the next one would begin or you hoped it would begin.
Well, in a lot of programs, what happens is you fire everybody when one contract runs out.
And of course, they then have to go look for jobs somewhere else.
And then when you get another job, then you got to go round up another crew.
And this is a little pain in the neck.
So what Garrison decided to do was that he was just going to keep the people on the payroll in between and make it up when he got the next contract.
Well, through an accounting system that existed at the time,
What happened was basically this.
The research foundation would, or the university actually, would put, at the beginning of the year you would estimate what your income was going to be.
And so we would estimate, or they, the Cultural Resource Laboratory, estimated like, I don't know, say $150,000, okay?
So the university advanced them, $150,000, with the understanding that during the year they would pay them back.
Well, these contracts would run through the research foundation.
So the research foundation would then be billed by the university for these things, and then they would pay for it out of the contracts.
Well, back in those days, it was a two or three month lag in all of this stuff.
And so what eventually happened was that when they finally, you know, when all of this finally
came out, it turned out that of the $150,000 that they had loaned to the Cultural Resource Management organization, they had only really gotten about $50,000 in grants.
And so there were about $50,000, or they got $100,000, there were $50,000 in a whole, that would amount to.
But this was not immediately apparent because of this three-month lag between the research foundation and so forth.
Now, I was in charge because the cultural resource management was under anthropology, so it was really my neck.
I was doing my best to try to correlate all of this stuff, and it was very hard for me to figure out when they would bill an agency
and money would go into the research foundation, and then the university would build.
Anyway, it was a big mess.
When the whole thing finally came to a crescendo was in 1980, around early December of 1980, when finally somebody in some accounting office realized what the problem was.
And that was, I think, because at the end of the fiscal year, they had missed putting the money back, and it had taken them from September to December to figure out what happened.
Well, by early December, it was obvious that the cultural resource management was about $66,000 in the hole.
They still had four projects that had to be written up.
Most of the money was already spent on these because they had spent that money to pay the people for the past.
Anyway, to make a long story short, Dean Maxwell called me into his office in the middle of December and told me to shut down the cultural resource management organization.
And I went in and fired 22 people.
I just told them all, hey, you know, end of December and that's it, buddy.
You know, I'll give you two weeks' notice.
So as of December 31st, everybody that was in there was out of a job.
quite a few people, 22 different people, clerical and shovel bums and crew chiefs and so forth.
And Irv Garrison was the head of the thing, so he was relieved of his position.
And shortly thereafter, he left anthropology and went to environmental engineering, where he worked for a couple of years.
in environmental engineering, and then, because he still had this contract for the Georgia, and then he eventually went to Georgia, and he's now teaching at the University of Georgia.
But anyway, so we ended up with, you know, with no program.
The whole thing shut down.
Our source of revenue and training, which we were, now that we had a graduate program, let's say in 1978, this was 1980, we were beginning to use this as our training place for our graduate students.
So in 1979, 1980, when all of this happened, I turned to Ed Jelks, who was the guy who had hired me at the University of Texas for that paleoecology grant.
He was now at Indiana University and asked him,
Illinois, I'm sorry, it was University of Illinois.
And I asked him if he knew of anybody, and he said yes.
He had an excellent person that was doing his contract work by the name of David Carlson.
So we hired David Carlson, and he came down in 1979.
with really a big problem.
I mean, we brought him down.
The whole program was, you know, was completely dissolved, and it was his job to rebuild it and do it in a physically responsible manner with the $66,000 debt hanging over his head, which it was...
We tried to get the university to write it off.
They had written off, we discovered, they had written off bad debts before.
But for some reason they decided they didn't want to write this one off.
We complained to the research foundation saying that part of the problem was their lag in two or three months of reporting.
But they didn't want to assume any responsibility.
The College of Liberal Arts didn't want to assume responsibility.
So it was, and I remember it was,
Oh, Tom, something was the head of Fiscal at the time.
Tom Cherry?
No.
Howard Vestal?
Eddie Joe Davis?
No, it was Tom, somebody else, anyway.
Not Peter Crute.
I don't remember, but anyway, I got to meet many of those people anyway.
Well, anyway, so we brought David Carlson down, and he did a marvelous job of getting us out of the mess and built that place back up into a respected organization, physically responsible.
And eventually worked out... You said physically, you meant fiscally.
Fiscally, yes.
F-I-S-C-A-F.
Fiscally responsible, yeah.
And anyway, and eventually worked out a deal with the Research Foundation, with the College of Liberal Arts, and with the university, where the, and with the contract program, where everybody bit the bullet for a fourth.
The research foundation paid a fourth of it.
University absorbed a fourth.
College of Liberal Arts paid a fourth.
And the contract office paid a fourth.
Part of the problem, and I don't know if this is really all that important or not, but in the early days of the contract program,
Most of the types of things that we did were what we call fixed price, meaning that we would bid on a project for a certain amount of money and then we would do it.
And if we could do it for less money, we got to keep the balance.
Fixed price, that's like you say you're going to build a house for $100,000 and you do it for $98,000, you got $2,000 profit.
Well, a lot of these funding agencies then went to a system called cost reimbursable in which they would only pay for what you actually spent.
And the big problem with cost reimbursable was that they would not allow any money for the writing of grants.
They wouldn't allow
for a lot of little things that we used to cover with some of the excess for fixed price.
So this is what made it very difficult in the later years to pay back some of that debt because we didn't really have a profit.
In other words, we had to answer for every cent that we actually did spend.
But anyway, so the contract office, the Cultural Resource Management Office, which was now renamed the Archaeological Research Laboratory from Cultural Resource Management under David Carlson.
Well, things rolled along pretty well.
Once David Carlson got here, the graduate program in nautical archaeology was doing very well.
We applied for a PhD, but ran into quite a bit of problems there.
That's in the early 80s.
Yes.
I'm trying to remember exactly when we applied.
We got the PhD in 1989, but we had applied for it back by 84, 85.
It was hung up for four or five years.
Part of it was we really didn't have a whole lot of trouble getting it through the Board of Regents.
Our trouble was that when it got to the Coordinating Board,
There was a real problem in that they were saying that they already had too many PhD programs in the state.
In anthropology?
Yes, as a matter of fact.
They said they didn't see a job market.
There wasn't an adequate job market to support another graduate program.
Now, we, of course, tried to demonstrate that ours was significantly different than theirs.
Well, I mean theirs.
I meant the University of Texas at Austin or SMU or Rice.
Of course, Rice and SMU didn't really make any difference because they're private universities.
The only other university that offered a PhD in anthropology was the University of Texas at Austin.
As far as you know, did they take, even privately, any, any, offer any opinion about the A&M program?
Well, it's hard to say.
I'm not really sure whether they helped us or hurt us.
It's really hard to say.
They, at first, were not real enthused with the idea, but on the other hand, we knew a lot of the faculty over there, and at least some of them privately said that they were not opposed.
So whether or not the university was opposed or not, I don't know.
Was there any on-site visit from the Coordinating Board or any...
The coordinating board came over here.
Some of the people on the coordinating board did come over.
And I can't remember who was head of it at that time.
Remember?
Oh.
His wife is the... Yeah.
Llewellyn?
No, it wasn't Llewellyn.
His wife is the Foreign International Program Director here.
I know, but I can't think of his name.
Anyway, but yes, we got to meet him several times.
Very nice gentleman, but he was also very firm.
And this is...